Anatomy and Physiology in Dentistry
Anatomy:
This field studies the structure of the human body, particularly the oral cavity.
It focuses on the arrangement and characteristics of teeth, gums, jaws, and
surrounding tissues, which is essential for accurate diagnosis and treatment in dentistry.
Physiology:
This aspect examines how bodily systems function.
In dentistry, it involves understanding processes such as tooth development, the role of
saliva in oral health, and the biological responses of gum tissues to treatments.
Applications in Dentistry:
Understanding Oral Structures:
Dentists need to know the different types of teeth (incisors, canines,
premolars, molars) and surrounding tissues to perform routine check-ups or complex
procedures.
Directional Terms:
Precise terminology like mesial (toward the midline) and distal (away from
the midline) is crucial for clear communication and documentation in dental
practice.
Body Planes:
These anatomical planes help locate and describe oral features.
Midsagittal Plane:
This divides the body into equal right and left halves, allowing assessment of symmetry in the oral cavity.
Frontal Plane:
Also known as the coronal plane, it separates the body into front
and back sections, aiding in understanding the layout of facial structures and
teeth.
Integrating knowledge of anatomy and physiology enhances a dental professional's ability
to understand patient needs, plan effective treatments, and communicate about oral
health.